(ia )

BÜRGERSDICIUS
HIS
INSTITUTIONS

L
0G I c K,
BE u Bun
"BOOK |
CHAR 1.
Of

Ihe

Nature and 'Divifio kon. of Ligiek,
Axiome 1.
OGICKis the Art of making of.
nn
Inftruments * 'and therewich di- * Woich Is 2
' refting the unlderftanding in the Srumsens an Knowledge Homonymie, of
Things. ''ör Ambiguity .
of Ba Sylug f n Del n m and There
is
yet
meaning, lies hid in this Wohd: Legick ; for it is Mehod.
_ ufed either for a natural' Faculty of Difcmürfe,
as when Perfons of little Learning or Underftand-
ing ars faid'to ufe Logick or * Difeourfe, when af-
-tex

(2)
ter their Manner; they queftion and maintain Difputes. Or for a Habit obrain'd by frequent Exercifes and Rules. Or laftly, for a Syfteme of Logical Precepts ; as"when one fays, The
Legick of Arißotle, The Lagick of Raums, &r. Logick in. he deliver'd Definition, any 'ane-Ihowd mifake, is taken for a Habit, which is as it were the End to which Precepts are defign'd.
Ax.2.Logick of the third and laft Acceptation, that is, a Syftem of Logical Precepts, confifts of two 'Parts, Thematick and Organick.
0
4x. 3. The firft is that which is imploy'd about Theams, and their various Affe&tions, and fecond Notions, as about the Matter of the Inftruments of Logick.
Ax. 4. The 'other conwerles abap n t the Organs themfelves, with which the Underftanding en- treats of Themes, and according to its" Capacity attains to the Knowledge of them.
u

CHAP. I

GT

emes

Simple

and

Compoled,

Uni

verfal

and

Singular.

Zn

Ar. A Theme is wrhatipever may bepropos'd
un - —

u

to the: Underftanding to be. knoiyn.
Ax. 2. Themes arg either Simple or Compofed.
: dw. 3. Themes Simple are thofe which are underftood without a. Gampopfirion or Complexion of Notigns, as Man, runs; &s.
Ä . 4x. 4, Compos'd, fuch as are underftaod by two or more Notigns, :by an Aff n rmation .or Negation jeim'd togesher, as Man. runs.
A

(3)
A Complexion of Notions is nothing elfe buf an Aff n rmation or Negation in the Underftanding or Speech. And by this means are "Themes Simple to be difcern'd from. Complex, and not by the Multitude or Compofition of Words: For a Simple Theme is often exprefs'd by a Compound Word, as Commun-Weal n b, Gost-Hart, &c. Frequent-Jy allo by many Words, as, Love of Parents to'ards their Ch n ldrem.
Sometimes in one, and that a Sih-
ple Word, you have a Theme Complex; as when, 1 fay. in Latin, pluit, ningit, itur, Ratur ; that is,
it Rains, it Snows, we go, we fland, ©.
4x. 5. A Theme Simpie is eicher WYniverfal or Singular. . an M on 4x. 6.. A. Univerfal is that. which isapt of its own Nature to be predicated of many tl n ings, as Man, Horfe, Plant, dc. _
en
A Univerfal is faid to be predicated of many things either a&tually Exifting, or at leaft fuch.as may Exift. So. Man was: a-Uniwerfal when Adam only was in being ; becaufe Ms» was not only apt of n ts ovwin Nature to be. faid of Adam, bt of all Men that were to be born. So altlio' the Sur be really but One, it may yet, that is, the Term Sun, be cali'd 3 Umwerfal , beeaufg many Suns may be made of the fame Nature wirh this of owrs.
' A, Univerfal is faid:to be, of its own Nature apt to be predicated ; left any one fheg'd think Homonymaus Words, ar Words given. to, many Singulars 'of the famg, Species; as, When. many Men are call'd Rerer, to be Maivenlais: Er H>-
monympus,as. ny
as
totheir

Homonympus, Names
eniy;
not

are
Dekniions, prediczted
of
or,

ma- a5
to zheir pw Nauen, - , io: 0020.
4%. 7. Ihe Singular n s that which. of its ow.3 Nature, is 3pF W be predicaned, only: of One. 'Ae. 8. Singulars.arg alfo. call'd Individuals be- 'caufe
Nature: not
divifible So
into.
more
gf
the
fame
Name
and
Plass,
che
he
may
'be
'divided

2
into
(4)
. into Body and Soul, Head, Belly, Breaft, Feet, and his other Members ; yet cannot he be divided "nto more Pla n io's.
Ax:9. Individuals are either Determin'd or Vague ; that is, Uncertain.
' Ax. to. Individuals are determin'd four ways :
firft, by their Proper Names, as Alexander, Bucephak s, n &c. And fecondly, by a Common Name taken by way of Excellency, for their Proper ; as Philofopher for Ariftotle. 'Thirdiy, by a demonftrative Pronoun, asthis Man. Fourthiy Periphrafis, as The Apoftle of Ihe Gentiles, for St. Paul,
u
Ax. 1. n An Uncertain®Undividual is that which is pronounc'd with a particular Pronoun ; as' Some Man, a certain Man, &c. by the Greeks 0 deive:

une
u

CHAP. IL
. ,. Of the Categories in general. :

x. "A Category is a-Series of Things gradually
L&
difposd under the fame chief Genus.
A Category is fo call''d-from the Greek Word kammbe HR, chatis, to Ariufe; for it wasa Word us'd in the' Forum, and from thence brought into the-Schöols, and figniftes to fay or aff n rm a Thing of any' Body. But'che School-men Yay Predicate.Farther, a'Chregory either is taken förthe Aff n rmation it felf, or for che Series 'and! Dirpoition of thofe things which may be aff rmed n
of others under the fame
Gens. Such a Series :Boarhitw calls a Predicament y
We hive chofen rather: the Greek Word.
:Ax. 2: The Categories are Ten, Subflance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, 'Bios, Paffion, When, Where, Seite, and Habit.: -- oc EEE
4 f ' nl "r
AX. 3.

(5)
'Ax. 3. Of which the one is of Subftances, the reft of Accidents. This Number is taken from the diverfity of Queftions which may be made concerning, the firitt and individual Subftances, as appearsfroin the very Appellations of the Categries.
e
Ax.4. In thefe Ten are contain'd all things which can be pr&dicated of any Subje&t ; others direötly, others indire&tly.
Ax. 5. That which diretly, requires thefe Five Conditions.
I. Ic muft bea Finite Being.
By this Condition God is excluded out of the Categories: For altho' God be a Subftance, yet is he not put in the Category of Subftance ; for thofe things which are dire&tly plac'd in this'CGaregory, not only fubfift of themfelves, but are fubjett alfo to Accidents, as we fhall hereafter make appear, which to think of God were impious. Befides, the Gens, properly fo call'd, of thofe things which are dire&tly. plac'd in the fame Category, muft be the fame : But neither Subftance, nor aniy thing elfe, can be the Gens properly fo call'd of things Finite and Infinite : God therefore being Infinite cannot be direltly contain'd under the Genus of Finite Subftances. Yet is he xqui-vocally revok'd to this Category. For Subftance isthe Genus »zquivocal both of God and Finite Subftances. . | II. True and Pofitive. To.a true Being frf are which oppos'd

of

as are

Beings by
no

means Reafon,
in

Categories. Genus,

Species, adly.

dire. The filtitious .or feign'd,, as Chimera, Centaure, da which are referr'd to Categories Hypothetically, or by way of Suppofition : For. if a Centaure were that which it is feign'd to be, it wou'd really be put in the Category of Subftances. 3dly. Appearances, or, as they commonly fay, Intentionals, as the Rain-bow, Colours appearing, Species's and | B3 Speäires

