The Method to Science.
25
LESSON III.
How these Common Heads of Notions are
to be Divided.
HE Differences that divide each Common
Head must be Intrinsecal to it. For,
since* we cannot discourse of two Disparate No¬Less. 2.
tions at once; and since were those Heads divi- Sett 5-
ded by Differences that are Extrinsecal to the
Common Genus, (or taken from another Head
each Species of it would consist of two Disparate
Notions; hence it is absolutely necessary to
Science that the Differences which divide these
Common. Heads be such as belong to no other
Common Head, but be within the Limits of that
Head, or Intrinsecal to it. Again, since the Dif¬
ference is most Formal in constituting the Species,
and the Genus only Material; were the Differences
Extrinsecal or Borrou'd from another Head, it
would follow, that all the Species of the Head
divided by such Differences would belong to ano¬
ther Head, viz. to that Head whence those Dif¬
ferences are taken: Which would put all our
Notions into Confusion, and involve a direct
Contradiction, as making Substances to be Qyan¬
tities, Qualities, &c.
2. Intrinsecal Differences can be no other but
more and less of the Common Notion: For since,
being Intrinsesal, they cannot be taken from any * S. 1.
other Head, it follows, that they must partake of
the

.
.
The Method to Science.
the Common Notion of their own respective Heads.
Again, since, if they did partake of the Common
Notion Equally, the would not. differ in that
Notion, and so would not be Differences of it; it
follows, that they must partake of it Vnequally;
that is, they must be more and less of thè Common
* . * ... * *
Notion.
3. Hence the Common Notion of Ens, Thing
or Substance being that which is capable of Ext¬
stence, is Immediately, Intrinsecally, or Essem ially
divided into what's more and less capable of Exi¬
stence. Wherefore,
J**
4. Divisible and Indivisible, which constitute
Body and Spirit, are the proper, and intrinsecal
Differences of the Common Head of Substante:
For, since Actual Division of the Entity makes
the thing to be no longet indivisum in se; that
is, to be unum; that is, to be Ens; that is, to be
capable of Existence; it follows, that that Ens
which is Divisible (or Body) is less capable of
Existenée, that is, has sess of the nature of Ens
or Substance; and the Ens that is Indivisible (or
Spirit) has more. Again, since Things Divisible.
or Bodies, can only have their own Being or Exi¬
stence, whereas Things indivisible, or Spirits, are
capable of being Other things also, or of having
in them the Natures and Existences of all the
things they krow; hence they have a greater Ca-
pacity of Existence than Bodies have; since
they have enough for themselves, and can impart
it to Millions of Other things besides; and, con¬
sequently, Body and Spirit are constituted by Divi¬
fible and Indivisible, as by the proper, immediate,
and Intrinsecal Differences that divide Substance
dr Ens.
The

The Method to Science.
27
5. The Divisibility and Indivisibility that are the
Intrinsecal Differences of Ens, are not those of
being Quantitative and not Quantitative. For,
were it so, it would follow, that some Intrinse¬
cal Differences of Ens in Common would be ta¬
ken from some other Head, viz. that of Quantity,
and * so, the Differences being what's most For
* S. 1.
mal in the Species, hence those Species of En¬
would rather be under that Head than its own.
Again, that Divisibility, which is of Quantity, may
oftentimes be put into Act, and yet the same
Ens remain; v. g. a Man may lose the Quantity
of an Arm; a Tree, of a Branch, &c. and yet
remain still the same Things; whereas, if Quanti¬
tative Divisibility were the Intrinsecal Difference
which constituted it such an Ens, Quantitativr
Division must by consequence make it cease to
be that Ens.
Moreover, since Quantity (as will be ſhort
Less. 4.
ly seen) is Divisibility, and Divisibility in Vnity
Sect. 2,4.
in case Quantity did Intrinsecally divide Ens, and
constitute Body, where-ever there were Quantity
there would be Vnity under that notion; and so
all Quantitative things would be but one Ens or
one Body; which is the highest absurdity. There¬
fore the Divisibility and Indivisibility which are
the intrinsecal Differences of Ens, are not those
of being Quantitative and not Quantitative.
6. Therefore the Divisibility and Indivisibility
which divide Ens Intrinsecally, must be the Di¬
visibility and Indivisibility of the Constituents of
Ens, as such; that is, the Divisibility of it into
Maiter and Form, and Indivisibility of it into
such Constituent parts: Which differences do
Essen-

38
The Method to Science.
Essentially divide the Genus of Ens, and constitute
the species of Body and Spirit. For, since we see
Bodies chang'd into one another, and therefore,
the former Body had really somewhat in it de¬
termining it to be actually what it was, which
we call the Form; and somewhat by which it
could be Another, which we call the Power to be
another, or Matter: Again, since we see that the
Form, which made the former Thing be what it
was, is gone when ’tis made Another Thing, and a
New Form succeeds into the same Matter; hence
we can frame diverse Conceptions of Body, which
belong to it as such an Ens, viz. Matter and
Form; and have a Ground in Nature to say there
is a Real divisibility between them. Wherefore
fince that Ens call'd Body, by being divisible into
Matter and Form, becomes liable to have the Form,
that constituted it such an Ens, separated from
the Matter, and so to lose its being the fame
Ens it was, and incapable of existing any lon¬
ger; and, for the same reason, a Spirit, by its
rat being divisible into Matter and Form, has not
in its Essence any Principle giving it a Capacity
not to Exist, as had the other; but has in its
self, or rather is of its self a more simple and
more perfect kind of Vnity, and consequently a
more Noble kind of Entity or Capacity of exist¬
ing, than is the other; Therefore the Divisibili¬
ty and Indivisibility which divide Ens Intrinsecal-
ly, must be the Divisibility and Indivisibility of it
into Matter and Form; which we call Metaphysi¬
cal Divisibility, because it is the divisibility of the
parts of Ens as such; that is, of Ens under the
Notion of Eus.
7. For

The Method to Science.
7. For the same Reason given above, (Sect.
1,2.) Mixet and Simple are the Intrinsecal Diffe¬
rences of Body: For, since Simple Bodies, which
we call Elements, have in them but the Nature
or Essence of One kind of Body only, and Mixt
Bodies have both the nature of That Kind, and
of other Elements besides; it is manifest that
they divide the Common Notion of Body by
more and less, which are Intrinsecal Differences.
8. For the same reason Mixt Body is divided
into Living Bodies, and not Li ving by Intrinsecal
Differences; because Those are more mixt, These
less.
9, For the same Reason, a Living Body, being
that which has a Principle os Motion in it selt,
is divided, as by Intrinsecal Differences into A¬
nimal, which is more Living, or more moving it
self (viz. by every slight Impression on the Sen¬
ses) and Plant, or Vegetable, which is less-moving
it self.
10. For the same Reason, Animal, which is
a Body moving it self by Impression on the Sen¬
ses, is intrinsecally divided into Brutes, which
do thus move themselves onely to a set Deter¬
minate number of Actions, which is to be les¬
moving it self by impressions on the Senses; and
Man, who by his Reason and Knowledge is apt to
move himself to a kind of Vniversality of Action,
which is to be more moving himself by means of
such impressions.
11. For
29
