s 3 Goyane to the:
MOND HE CarTestus. 3

Things in that World the Earth takes a Turn
upon as aVain Babler, and an Antique Teller about the Sur, as in that of Copernicm : And it
0 Dreams. Itisfaid, There is neither .good Defe. tom. is known that M. Defcartes hath more than once,
Chriftian nor good.Catholick there, fince: they 2. len. 43» onthat.occafion, reileted on the Misfortune of
tamper with Principles too Delicate and Dan-poor Galilew. I cannot tell, büt' it may be on
gerous, in Matters relating to Religion. No his Account he hathtaken fo much Pains to prove
Body can tell whatto make oftheir Belief of the Pan, 3. r this Paradox, That the Earth ftands ftill, though
Creation of Our World, the Produdtion of Matter 2%
at ehe fame Time it is carried about the Sun by
and the Providlence of Goil ; who, . with them, that Luminary's Vortex. _ Letit be how it will,
had no other.Care upon.him: than to order the many of thofe that give out they have beit cxa- |: Cubical Partieles of Matter.to whirl about theit mined that Country; have made their Kelations |; Center: . After which he.might fit Idle and ofit, but fo differently, that a Man can fearce
Unconcerned,, fince allthe reftcould be managed yet determine what he muft believe : If yon will * without the.leaft'of his Afliftance.
zu
credit one Party, they?lltell you, It is no World
: On the otlier Side, we are aflured, A moft atall, but a perfekt Chaos: Thatalllie in Dif-
excellent Condu&t fhines through the whole Coin-order, and wild Gonfulion :" That'tisimpollible
pofition ; That all is admirably contrived, and for a Man to turn himfelf in it: That there is
founded upon the Rules and Laws of Näture : neither Light nor_Calours, .neither Beat nor
That this World is indeed disburthened . of: an Cold, Drought nor -Moifture: That Plants and
infinite Swarm of Accidents, Qualisies, and'Inten-Animals there don't live. There you have not
Hiomal Species, as of an. unprofitable Lumber, only Liberty, but poöfitive Orders to doubt of
wherewich the Philofophers have imbroiled and every thingin Nature. Some there fhall be that
incumbred ours: But yet, notwithftanding it will .difpute you out' of the Nann c ofa Man ;
cannot be deny?d, but che Senfes are fübjeet to though you have a Face like other Men ; though
the ame Impreflions there as: here, only- with yox be made up'of Flefh and Bone as they;
this Difference,that the Caufes are more acknow« though you Walk, and Eat,' and Sicep, and; ledged, and better explain'd.
on
'ina Word, perform all the Natura) Fun&tions
Asto the Point of Religion, nothing feeins ofa Man; yet, Tfay, there arethofe that halt
more juftifiable than the Apology of thefe conteft that Title with you, until_ having con-
Gentlemen, which perhaps fome have ingaged too verfed you, and underftood. you' (peak confe-
inconfiderately for an Affair ofthat Weight and guentially, they fhall be convinced that you have
Moment. Can weapprehend a greäter Idea of Reafon, zu un
God Almighty, than that which M, Defeartes The /nhabltants look Proud and Scornful,"and
hath given? An Idea that he derived not from haye not the leaft Refpeöt for Antiqnity. Ard-
the Vifible Creatures, chat fleight and faint Ray Kotle, efpecially is fcoufed in all Companies, and
of an infinitely perfelt Being ; but which his, upon all Occafions, by them, being look'd
Mind found imprefled upon it felf, and which upon \ Bn left

u

+2: Voyage to the
Io2ld Of GARTESIUS, 5

left no room for him to doubt of che Exiftence

lof-a.Soyereign Being, though«he pofleffed nei-

that Philofopher wroteto the Sorbon Doftors, -in;

ther Heaven nor Earth, norany Body, nor in-

dedicating his Meditations to them ; which is fo

deed ahy other Söhl:than bis': Can the Omnipo-

true, that not long fince, a Friend of mine, not

tence of a.Deity be: advanced to a more tran-

wont to be very. Nice in thof& Matters, having

fcendlent Degres than herhath done it? God,

read by chance;the Letter at my Houfe, which

according. to 'himz."tan :caufe, Tat Two and

touched him; 'and finding farther the. Title of

'Thriee'fhall npt. make'Five; : That/four:Sides fhall

Medjtations in the Front of the Work, he feri-

'not be; requifiteitor mike a Square.; . That the

oully entreated; me to lend him that Godly,

"Whole: fhall!beino-bigger than Ohs of its Parts 3

Book, to.entertain his Devotions during Pajfion

Effe&ts' that; other »Philofophärs never fcruple t6 ccR.

' place,out:of.the Reach:'of:thei:Ggdshead. . But

This fo ftrange Variety_of. Opinions, - and has not an. Author-of!a" little Piecd,n:called; 4 ' Relations counter to one another, of a World, Zettertwrote:to a:Learnedn Fcfite, sclearly Ihewn, otherwife of. no-littie Renown, provoked. n ny

"That?tis Defcartes: World that iS.deferibed in the

Curiofity, and induced.me to be convinced of. fir Chapter of.Gemfis ?* Anocher:'Book: hath . the Truth or Faifity of the Reports, in my. fince been 'publilh'd'in Holland, ::with 'the "Title ownPerfon. All the Difliculey was to find a

of Cartifim. Mofaifdns,;.and is'to\che:fane effed.

Guide to condu&t me to a Country, to which

The Author öfthe Treatife. coitcerning: The Ins

there wasnno Road paflable either for Horfe or

fuence::of the Stars, ideferibes : the. End' of-the

Foot; for Coach or Barge, by Land or Sca:

World: upon Defcartes- his. Hypothelis; Mon+

But prefently after my Refolve, I was happily

fieur Sesttanus,. in;a late Apolögy,.thät -heoffer-

favoured wich the moft lucky'Occafion that could

ed for'24. .Defcartes, -agamnft, thafe:chat Ender-

be wih?d, for tie undertaking my Voyage with

voureditorender him:abnoxious to the Sufpicioh

altthe Pleafure and -Eafe imaginable. Having

of-Atheifm, obfervesi to us: the Refpe@:;he had

fojourned fome Months in a Country Town,

for Religion, certifying us,' "That one of: his

I ftrook up Acquaintance with an Old Standard,

" Reafbns for the redücing.his Meditatidns to. the

of about eighty Yn ears,
a Man of Parts, and that

Nuinber of Six, "was: the. Confiderätion of che

formerly had converfed much with 4. Defcartes,

Sis:.Days which'God imployed in'thg:Creition

That Commerce had begot in him an unaccdünt-

of.the World, . If we.niay credit 'Parher' Mer-

able Zealfor the Tenets of that Philofopher, and'

firnus,. a Learned and Noted Mirim, "and an

exafperated him to declaim againft the Method

intimate Acquaintance of "Defcartes, we fhall

and Opinionsof the School, . the Prejudices of

find:nothing of a more Chriftian Temper, :and

Childhood, and taught himto make external Elo-

that infpires us more ravilbingly wich the Love

gies on che Cartofian Philofophy. He had fo

of God.than Defcartes Philofophy. In Ihort ,

given himfelfup to this Opinion, that he could

there is nothing more edifying than the'Letter

no ways fuffer,. in Point of Philofophy, any ong

n

that, tg deviate never fo little from it. In a Con«

B3

ferencg
