1

A
VOYAGE
TO
THE WORLD OF CARTELIUS

PART. I

It fares with the world of Monsieur Descartes,
as with other lately discovered Lands,
whereof such different Accounts are given,
as often contradict one another. Scarce
Mention was made of this New World, but an in-
finite Number of French, English and Dutchmen
resolve to see it. The Spaniard, however Zea-
lous for new Discoveries, understanding it was
barren of Mines of Gold and Silver, of Indigo
and Ginger, seemed not much concerned about
it : Wherefore those that had most contributed
unto it were not a little pleased, as believing,
they had no Reason to apprehend the Inquisition's
coming there to disturb them. Among other
B Things



2 A Voyage to the

Things in that World the earth takes a Turn
about the Sun, as in that Copernicus : And it
Defe. Tom. is known that M.Descartes hat more than once,
2. Less. 43, on that occasion, reflected on the Misfortune of
75. poor Galileus. I cannot tell, but it may be on 
his Account he hath takne so much Pains to prove 
part. 3. pr. this Paradox, That the Earth stands still, though
n.26. at the same Time it is carried about the Sun by
that Luminary's Vortex. Let it be how it will,
many of those that give out they have best exa-
mined that Country, have made their Relations
of it, but so differently, that a Man can fearce
yet determine what he must believe : if you will
credit one Party, they'll tell you, It is no World
at all, but a perfect Chaos : That all lie in Dis-
order, and wild Confution : That 'tis impossible 
for a Man to turn Himself in it: That there is 
neither Light nor Colours, neither Heat nor
Cold, Drought nor Moisture: That Plants and
Animals there don't live. There you have not
only Liberty, but positive Orders to doubt of
every thing in Nature. Some there shall be taht
will dispute you out of the Name of a Man ; 
though you have a Face like other Men ; though
you be made up of Flesh and Bone as they ; 
though you Walk, and Eat, and Sleep, and
in a Word, perform all the Natural Functions
of a Man ; yet, I say, there are those that shall
contest that Title with you, until having con-
versed you, and understood you speak confe-
quentially, they shall be convinced that you have
Reason.
The Inhabitants look Proud and Scornful, and
have not the least Respect for Antiquity. Ari-
stotle, especially is scouted in all Companies, and
upon all Occasions, by the, being look'd 
upon

World of Cartesius 3

upon as a Vain Babler, and an Antique Teller
of Dreams. It is said, There is neither good 
Christian nor good Chatolick there, since they
tamper with Principles too Delicate and Dan-
gerous, in Matters relating to Religion. No
Body can tell what to make of their Belief of the
Creation of Our World, the Production of Matter
and the Providence of God ; who, with them,
had no other Care upon him than to order the
Cubical Particles of Matters to whirl about their
Center : After which he might fit Idle and 
Unconcerned, since all the rest could be managed
withouth the least of his Assistance
On the other Side, we are assured, a Most 
excellent Conduct shines through the whole Com-
position; That all is admirably contrived, and
founded upon the Rules and Laws of Nature : 
That this World is indeed disburthened of an
infinite Swarm of Accidents, Qualities and inten-
tional Species, as of an unprofitable Lumber,
wherewith the Philosophers have imbroiled and
incumbred ours: But yet, notwithstanding it
cannot be deny'd, but the Senses are subject to
the same Impressions there as here, only with
this DIfference, that the Causes are more acknow-
ledged, and better explain'd
As to the Point of Religion, nothing seems
more justifiable than the Apology of these 
Gentlemen, which perhaps some have ingaged too
inconfiderately for an Affair of that Weight and
Moment. Can we apprehend a greater Idea of 
God Almighty, than that which M. Descartes 
hath given? An Idea that he derived not from
the Visible Creatures, that fleight and faint Ray
of an infinitely perfect Being ; but which his 
Mind found impressed upon it self, and which
B2 left

4 A Voyage to the

left no room for him to doubt the Existance
of a Sovereign Being, though he possessed nei-
ther Heaven nor Earth, nor any body, nor in-
deed any other Soul than his : Can the Omnipo-
tence of a Deity be advanced to a more tran-
scendent Degree than he hath done it? God,
according to him, can cause, That Two and 
Three shall not make Five ; That four Sides shall
not be requisite to make a Square; That the 
While shall be no bigger than One of its Parts;
Effects that other Philosophers never scruple to
place out of the Reach of the God head. But
has not an Author of a Little Piecd, called, A
Letter wrote to a Learned Jesuite, clearly shewn, 
That'tis Descartes World that is described in the 
first Chapter of Genesis? Another Book hath
since been publish'd in Holland, with the Tithle
of Cartesius Mosaisans. And is to the same effect.
The author of the Treatise concerning The in-
fluence of the Stars, describes the End of the
World upon Descartes his Hypothesis. Mon-
sieur Scottanus, in a late Apology, that he offer-
ed for M. Descartes, against those that Endea-
voured to render him obnoxious to the Suspicion
of Atheism, observes to us the Respect he had
for Religion, certifying us, That one of his
Reasons for the reducing his Meditations to the
Number of Six, was the Confideration of the 
Six Days which God imployed in the Creation
of the World. If we may credit Father Mer-
sennus, a Learned and Noted Minim, and an
intimate Acquaitance of Descartes, we shall
find nothing of a more Christian Temper, and
that inspires us more ravishingly wiht Love
of God than Descartes Philosophy. In short,
there is nothing more edifying than the Letter 
that

World of Cartesius 5

that Philosopher wrote to the Sorbon Doctors, in
dedicating his Meditations to them ; which is so
true, that not long since, a Friend of mine, not
wont to be very Nice in those Matters, having
read by chance the Letters at my House, which 
touched him; and finding farther the Title of
Mediations in the Front of the Work, he feri-
ously entreated me to lend him that Godly 
Book, to enteratain his Devotions during Passion
Week.
This so strange Variety of Opinions, and
Relations counter to one another, of a World,
otherwise of no little Renown, provoked my 
Curiosity, and induced me to be convinced of
the Truth of Falsity of the Reports, in my
own Person. All the Difficulty was to find a 
Guide to conduct me to a Country, to which 
there was no Road passable either for Horse or
Foot, for Coach or Barge, by Land or Sea :
But presently after my Resolve, I was happily
favoured with the most lucky Occasion that could
be wish'd, for the undertaking my Voyaer with
all the Pleasure and Ease imaginable. Having
sojourned some Months in a Country Town,
I Strook up Acquaintance with an Old Standard,
of about eighty Years, a Man of Parts, and that
formerly had conversed much with M. Descartes.
That Commerce had begot in him an unaccount-
able Zeal for the Tenets of that Philosopher, and
exasperated him to declaim against the Method
and Opinions of the School, the Prejudice of
Childhood, and taught him to make external Elo-
gies on the Cartesian Philosophy. He had so
given himself up to this Opinion, that he could
no ways suffer, in Point of Philosophy, any one
to deviate never so little from it. in a Con-
B3 ference
