Transcribus Transcriptie Hoofdstuk 3 (getraind op hoofdstuk
1 & 2, dus daarom nieuw hoofdstuk gekozen voor test).

The Method to Science.
a5
LESSON IT1.
How these Commnon Heads of Noions are
to be Divided-
wr H Differences that divide each Common
Head must be Intrinsecal to it. For,
since * we cannot discourse of two Disparate No- * Lessa-
tions at once; and since were those Heads divi, Sttt.i
ded by Differences that are Exrrinsecal to the
Common Genus, (or taken from another Head,
each Species of it would consist of two Disparate
Notions; hence it is absolutely necessary to
Science that the Differences which divide these
Common Heads be such as belong to no other
Common Head, but be within the Limits of that
Head, or Intrinseeal to it. Again, since the Dif-
ference is most Formal in constituting the Species,
and the Genus only Material; were the Differences
Extrinsecal or Borrow'd from another Head, it
would follow, that all the Species of the Head
divided by such Differences would belong to ano-
ther Head, viz, to that Head whence those Dif-
ferences are taken: Which would put all our-
Notions into Confusion, and involve a direct
Contradiction, as making Substances to be Qxan-
tities, Qualities, Sc-
2. Intrinsecal Differences can be no other but
more and less of the Common Notion: For since,
being Intrinseeal, ✝ they cannot be taken from any S.1.
other Head, it follows, that they must partake of
the

The Method to Science.
the Common Notion of their own respective Heads.
Again, since, if they did partake of the Common
Notion Equally, thel would nbt differ in that
Notion, and so would not be Differences of it; it
followe, that they sust partake of it Oneamally;
that is, they must be more and lels of the Common
S
Notion.
3. Hence the Common Notion of Ens, Thing
or Substance being that which is capable of Exr-
stence, is Immediately, Intrinsecally, or Essentially
divided into what's more and less canable of Exi-
stence. Wherefore.
2
4. Divisiole and Indivisible, which constitute
Body and Spirit, are the proper and intrinsecal
Differences of the Common Head of Substante;
For, since Actual Division of the Entity makes
the thing to be no longer indivisam in se; that
is, to be unum; that is, to be Ens; that is, to be
capable of Existence; it follows, that that Ens
which is Divisible (or Body) is less capable of
Existence, that is, has sess of the nature of Ens-
or Substance; and the Ens that is Indivisible (or
Spirit) has more. Again, since Things Divisible-
or Bodies, can only have their own Being or Exi-
stence, whereas Things indivisible, or Spirits, are
capable of being Other things also, or of having
in them the Natures and Existences of all the
things they kow; hence they have a greater Ca-
pacity of Existence than Bodies have; since
they have enough for themselves, and can impart
it to Missions of Other things besides; and, con-
sequently, Bady and Spirit are constituted by Divi-
sible and Indivisible, as by the proper, immediate,
and Intrinsecal Differences that divide Substance
or Ens-
The

The Method to Science.
17
5. The Divifhility and Indivisibvlity that are the
Intrinsecal Differences of Cns, are not those of
heing Quantitative and not Quantitative. For,
were it so, it would follow, that some Intrinse-
cal Differences of Ens in Common woud be th-
ken from some other Hend, viz, that of Quantityy
and * so, the Differences being what's most For-
* S. 1.
mal in the Species, hence those Species of En-
would rather be under that Head than its onn,
Again, that Divifbility, which is of Quantity, may
oftentimes be put into Act, and yet the same
Ens remain; vg. a Man may lose the Quantity
of an Arm; a Tree, of a Branch, &c, and yet
remain still the same Things; whereas, if Quanti-
tative Divisibisity were the Intrinsecal Differenco
which constituted it such an Ens, Quantitative
Division must by consequence make it cease to
be that Ens-
Moreover, since Quantity (as will be ✝ short-
Less. 4.
ly seen) is Divisibility, and Divisbility in Unity
Sect. 3,4.
in case Quantity did Intrinsacallydivide Ens, and
constitute Body, where ever there were Quantity
there would be Unity under that notion; and so
all Quantitative things would be but one Ens or
one Body; which is the highest absurdity, There-
fore the Divisibility and Indivisibility which are
the intrinsecal Differences of Ens, are not those
of being Quantitative and not Quantitative.
6. Therefore the Divisibility and Indivisibility
which divide cnd Intrinsecally, must be the Di-
visibility and Indivisibility of the Constituents of
Ens, as such; that is, the Divisibility of it into
Maiter and Form, and Indivisibility of it into
such Constituent parts: Which differences do
Essen-

4
The Method to Science.
Essentially divide the Genus of Ens, and constitute
the species of Body and Spirit. For, since we see
Bodies chang'd into one another, and therefore,
the former Body had really somewhat in it de-
termining it to be actually what it was, which
we call the Form; and somewhat by which it
could be Another, which we call the Power to be
another, or Matter: Again, since we see that the
Form, which made the former Thing be what it
was, is gone when 'tis made Another Thing, and a
New Form succeeds into the same Matter; hence
we can frame diverse Conceptions of Bady, which
belong to it as such an Ens, viz. Matter and
Form; and have a Ground in Nature to say there
is a Real divisibility between them. Wherefore
since that Ens call'd Bady, by being divisible into
Matter and Form, becomes liable to have the Form,
that constituted it such an Ens, separated from
the Matter, and so to lose its being the fame
Ens it was, and incapable of existing any lon-
ger; and, for the same reason, a Spirit, by its
nat being divisible into Matter and Form, has not
in its Essence any Principle giving it a Capacity
not to Exist, as had the other; but has in its
self, or rather is of its self a more simple and
more perfect kind of Onity, and consequently a
more Noble kind of Entity or Capacity of exist-
ing, than is the other; Therefore the Divisibili,
ty and Indivisibility which divide Ens Intrinsecal-
ly, must be the Divisibility and Indivisibility of it
into Matter and Form; which we call Metaplysi-
cal Divisihility, because it is the divisibility of the
parts of Ens as such; that is, of Ens under the
Notion of Eni-
7. For

The Method to Science
7. For the same Reason given above, (Suct.
112.) Mixt and Simple are the Intrinsecal Diffe-
rences of sady: For, since Simple Bodies, which
we call Elements, have in them but the Nature
or Essence of One kind of Body only, and Mixt
Bodies have both the nature of That Rind, and
of other Elements besides; it is manifest that
they divide the Common Notion of Body by
more and less, which are Intrinsecal Differences.
8. For the same reason Mirt hody is divided
into Living Bodies, and not Living by Intrinsecal
Differences; because Those are more mixt, These
less.
9, For the same Reason, a Riuing Body, being
that which has a Principle of Motion in it self,
is divided, as by Intrinsecal Differences into B-
nimal, which is more Living, or more moving it
self (viz, by every ssight Impression on the Sen-
ses) and Plant, or Vegetable, which is lesimwving
it self.
10. For the same Reason, Animal, which is
a Body moving it self by Impression on the Sen-
ses, is intrinsecally divided into uutes, which
do thus move themselves onely to a set Deter-
minate number of Actions, which is to be less
moving it self by impressions on the Senses; and
Man, who by his Reason and Knowledge is apt to
move himself to a kind of Oniversality of Action,
which is to be more moving himself by means of
such impressions.
11. For
ay

ye-
The Method to Science.
11. For the same Reason, an, or Rational
himal, is divided intrinsecally and essentially in-
to those who have more and less the Faculty or
Power of Reasoning; who are, therefore, pro-
perly and essentially more and less Men-
Note, That Common Logicians, because we
cannot descend or reach to those particular-
intrinsecal Differences which constitute In-
divighals, do therefore make [Man) the
lowest species: But 'tis one thing what may
serve for Logical Speeulation; another, what
the nature of the thing bears, and the right
division of the Commoner Notion by Intrin-
secal differences requires: Wherefore, tho
not able to discern the intermediate Species-
and (as, far as I have observ'd) not re-
flecting that mure and less of the common
Notion do make the Intrinsecal and Effenti-
al Differences that constitute its Species,
Couimon hogicians do content themselves
to put Individuums immediately under Man-
and thence mistake Man to have no Essen-
tial Differences at all, but Accidental ones
only; yet 'tis manifest, that, since all In-
dividuum,s are diverse Entin or Things, and
Fente does formally Constitute an Ens the
D irences that constitute diverse Entia
mnst necessarily be Essential, So that a-
mo ast Men there may be many Degrees of
more or less Iational, constituting diverse
under Species of Qan, could we have light
to distinguish them; as well as there are di-
verse
SS

The Method to Science.
verse species of Dogs, Horses, Trees, and
Flowers,
13. Partieular or Singular Things are properly
call'd Indibiduums, because they cannot be divi-
ded into more of the same Notion, as all others
in the same Line could. For Socrates cannot be
divided into more that have the particular Na-
ture of Socrates in them, as Man could into-
more that have the Common Nature of Man-
13, Individuals only are properly and com-
pleatly Entia or Things, and capable of existing.
For, since the Notion of Thing is [Capable of
Existing) and all Notions that are superiour to
the Individuum are Inadequate or Partial Notions
of it, as is manifest; and the Individuum is the
Whole, as comprining all those Parts; and no
Part can exist by its own Virtue, or out of the
whole; in regard it would then be of it self a
whole Ens and not a Part onely; it follows
that onely Individlals are properly and compleat-
ly Entia or capable of Existing.
14. Individuals are the proper Subject or Sup-
positum of all other Notions or Natures both of
its own Line, and of all the rest. For, * since *Sect.15
Individuals onely are properly Things, or capa-
ble of Existing; it follows, that both all in its
own Line, and much more in all the other Lines
(which have not at all in their peculiar Noti-
ons any Order or Title to Existence) must e-
xist and subsist in Individuals, as in their supposi-
tun or subject; which lends them to be, and su-
stains them in heing.
CO4

The Method to Science.
3
COLARIS.
1. Hence, 'tis Logically demonstrated that
every individual Man is but One Ens or Thing;
since he descends Lineally from that Common
Head by intrinsecal Differences of more and less,
which constitute him truly One in that Line;
that is, one Ens, or one Thing. Whence the
contrary Position rarels all the Well Order'd
Frame of Human Notions, and the Division of
E2
them by intrinsecal Differences; which (as has
Sest. 13,
been shewn) must needs put all our thoughts in-
13
to Confusion, and wholly obstruct the Way to
Science. Nor matters it that there are two con-
trary Natures in him, Corporeal and Spiritual;
since the Notion of Ens is not the Notion of the
a Lectis, Nature, but of the suppositum which has the na-
ture in it. Add, that the notion of Ens is in-
different to both Natures; and therefore, if they
may be co ordinate to one End, and that it wrong
no other Principle, they may both club into one
Thing, and compound one Ens; As appears in
the Incarnation, in which the Second Person of
the Trinity assum'd Human Nature, and joyn'd
it to it self in the same suppositum,
3. The Notion of Rational (which is in
some fort truly Spiritual) may be Co ordinate
to the Notion of some kind of Body. For,
since Animal is directly subsum'd under the
Notion of Body, and the Notion of Animal
(or of a Thing moving it self by Impressions
on

Less. 3. The Method to Science.
on the Senses) is Intrinsecally divided by lesi-
moving it self thus, which constitutes Brutes,
and more moving it self thus, which is manifest-
ly done by its being Rational, that is in part spi-
ritual; It follows, that the Notion of Rational
or Spiritual may be Co ordinate to some Body,
(viz, to Animal) as one of the Proper and Intrin-
secal Differences of that Genus, as is shewn
above.
3. Notwithstanding Man cannot be both Bo-
dy and Spirit formally. For, then he must ne-
cessarily be Two Entities in distinct hines of
Substance; the one under the Genus of Body, the
other of Spirit. Whence, he would be Unum
and non- Unum, in the same regard, or accor-
ding to the same Formal Notion; that is, he
would be Ens and non Ens; and consist formal-
ly of two Things as perfectly distinct as an An-
gel and an Ape; and even be more monstrous
than a Hircocervus or Chimara; because he would
be formally, that is essentially, made up of two
more generically opposit Things than theie
are conceiv'd to be. Wherefore, the Notion
of Man being deduced by Intrinsecal Differences
from the Genlis of Body, he is formally a Body,
tho' his Soul be of a spiritual Nature, which
makes him virtually a Spirit. Whence also, the
manner of Existence following from what's For-
mal in the Thing, he has, in this State, a Cor-
poreal Mamner of Existence; as appears by his,
gleaning Knowledge by the Senses; his being
Measurable by Quantity, Alterable by Corpore-
al Qualities; nay, even his peculiar and pro-
per Action of Discourse attends the slow pace
of
23

I4
The Method to Science. Bool I.
of Fancy and Bodily Motion; none of which
could be competent to a Pure Spirit that exists
after a Spiritual and Indivisile manner. Nor
does this mote preindice the Spiritual Nature of
a Soul that it exists and works in some regards
after the manner of a Body, than it does preiu-
dice the Nature of a Body, (a Stone, for exam-
ple) that it exists in us spiritually; as it doea
when we keow it, or have the Notion or Nature
of it in our Understanding
4. Hence is seen what Notions do formally
belong to the Line of Substance, or to Ens as
Ens, viz. the several spcies of it descending
downwards from the Common Head, till we
come to the Idividuum; which therefore is a
compleat Ens, as including all those Superiour or
partial Notions; and * therefore it only is in
proper speech, an Ens or Thing; in regard it
onely heing ultimately determin'd to be This or
Tnat, only It is, by consequence, capable of exist-
ing, which is the Definition of Ens. Whence all
Potential or Indeterminate Notions of Ens, such
as are Ens, Corpus, Vivens, or Animal in Com-
mon, are, for the same reason, incapable of Ex-
isting, otherwise than as they are Parts of the
compleat Ens or Individuum; and therefore they
are phras'd by the Schools, Subsfantie Secunde,
and the Individuum Substantia Prima, Lower than
the Individuum in the Line of Ens we cannot go,
nor can any Notion be superadded to it that be-
long Properly to Ens, but that of Existence, of
which Ens is a Capacity. Whence we do not call
Existence a Form (or Act,) for This joyn'd with
the Matter (or Power) does constitute that com-
pound

Lest. 1. The Method to Science.
pound Ens call'd Body, and, therefore, are both
presuppos'd to Existence; but we call it the last
Formality of every created Ens, because it has
no Potentiality at all in that Line, but is Pure
Actuality, and therefore most resembles GoD-
our Greator and the sole Giver of it, whose
very Essence is Self- Existence.
5. All those Notions before said, taking them
precisely as determining the common Notion of
Ens, and belonging to it (even to the last Actu-
ally of it EExistence inclusively) are Metaphy-
fieal Notions: The proper Object of which Sci-
ence is Ens; not taken as it abstracts from Ex-
istence, but as it abstracts from all the other Pre-
dicaments or common Heads of Notions; that
is, from all Matter and Motion, and all Modes
or Manners of them. For which Reason Exi-
stence, which more perfectly abstracts from both,
does mere formally belong to the Object of Me-
taphysicks,
om amm-
D
L LS
1
1 5

