(1
S- -C C- S- C C Co
onmmmm-
C-C-C-CC-
bt Rcihs Sbisosl
W THIT T ON
OE
2
C 2
BOOK I.
onmmm-
CHI I.
Of the Noture and Division of Iqgich-
OCI K is the Art of making of
Axiome 1
Which so-
Instruments and therewith di-
Trument;
recting the understanding in the
are Definiti-
Bo
Knowledge of Things.
on, Divisin,
There is yet an Homonymle, or Ambiguity of Spuixisn and
meaning, lies hid in this Wold Lagick; for it is Meha-
ufed either for a natural Faculty of Discourse,
as when Persons of little Learming or Understand-
ing are said to use Logick or Discourse, when af-
ter

ter their Manner; they question and maintain
Disputes. Or for a Habit obtain'd by frequent
Exereises and Rules. Or lastly, for a Systeme of
Logical Precepts; as when one says, The Lagick of
dristoetle, The Iagick of Raoms, be Lagiek in ths de-
liver'd Definition, last any one shou'd mistake, is
taken for a Habit, which is as it were the End to
which Precepts are design'd.
A.- a Lagick of the third and last Acceptation, that
is, a System of Logical Precepts, consists of two
Parts, Thematick and Organiak.
A. 3. The first is that which is imploy'd about
Theams, and their various Affections, and second
Notions, as about the Matter of the Instruments
of Logick.
Ar- 4. The other comerses about the Organs
themselves, with which the Understanding en-
treats of Themes, and according to its Capacity
artains to the Knowledge of them.
a- an a- a
CH II
Of Themes Simple and Composed, Uni-
versal and Singular-
At1. d Theme is whatsaever may be propos'd
2 to the Understanding to be known-
A. a3. Themes are either Simple or Composed.
de. 3. Themes Simple are those which are un-
derstood without a Composition or Complexion of
Notions, as Man, runs, &e-
Ae-3, Compos'd, such as are understood by two
or more Notions, by an Affirmation or Negation
ivin'd together, as Man runs.
C.S.2
SS
a-. on

C3
A Complexion of Notions is nothing else but
an Affirmation or Negation in the Understanding
or Speech. And hy this means are Themes Sim-
ple to be discern'd from Complex, and not by
the Multitude or Composition of Words: For a
Simple Theme is often express'd by a Compound
Word, as Common Wealt h, Cont-Hlart, &rc. Frequent-
ly also by many Words, as, Lwve of Parents to ards
their Cbildren, Somecimes in one, and that a Sim-
ple Word, you have a Theme Complex; as when
I say in Latin, pluit, ningit, itur, statur; that is,
it Rains, it Snows, we go, we stand, &re.
Ar. 5. Theme Simple is either Universal or
Singular.
Ae. 6. A. Universal is that which is apt of its
own Nature to be predicated of many things, as
Mmn, Horse, Plans, bre-
A Universal is said to be predicated of many
things either actually Existing, or at least such as
may Exist. So Man was, a Uniuersal when Adam-
only was in being; because Man was not only apt
of its oum Nature to be said of Adam, but of all
Men that were to be Born. So alcho the Sun be
really but One, it may yet, that is, the Term Sum,
be call'd a Universal, beeause many Sumis may be
made of the same Nature with this of ours
8. Universal is said to be of its own Nature
apt to be predicated; lest any one shon'd think
Hlomonymou Words, or Words given to many-
Singulars of the same Species; as, When many
Men are call'd Peter, to be Univensals: For Ho-
monymous, as Homonympus, are predicated of ma-
ny as to their Namos only, not Definnions, or, as
to their puen Natures.
Ade.7. The Singular is that which of its ow
Nature, is ant to be predieared only of One-
Ae- 8. Singulars ary also call'd Individuals be-
cause not divisible into more of the same Name-
and Nature So Plats, altho he may be divided
into

(
into Body and Soul, Head, helly, Breast, Feet,
and his other Members; yet cannot he be divided
nto more Plato's.
de. 9. Individuals are either Determin'd or
Vague; that is, Uncertain-
Ax- 1o. Individuals are determin'd four ways;
first, by their Proper Names, as Alexander, Buca-
phalus, &c. And secondly, by a Common Name-
taken by way of Excellency, for their Proper; as
Philosopher for Aristotle. Thirdly, by a demonstra-
tive Pronoun, as this Man. Fourthly Periphrasis, as
The Apostle of the Gentiles, for it. Paul-
Ax. 11. An Uncertainr Undividual is that which
is pronoune'd with a particular Pronoun; as Some-
Man, a certain Man, Gre by the Greeks Reivect.
CHI Il-
Of the Calegories in general-
ds 11I. Categury is a Series of Things gradually
T dispos d under the same chief Genuu-
A Cntigtary is so call'd from the Greel Word
itumple tins, that is, to Abcnse; for it was a Word
us'd in the Forum, and from thence brought into
the Schools, and signifies to say or affirm a Thing of
any Body hut the School- men say Pradicate Farther,
a Categary either is taken for the Affirmation it self,
or for the Series and Disposition of those things
which may be affirmed of others under the same
Senuis. Such a Series Boethiin calls a Predicament.
We hive chosen rather the Greet Word-
A. 3. The Categories are Ten, Substance, Nvan-
tity, Suality, Ralation, action, Passion, Whe-
Where,
Srits, and Habit.
As. 3.

Aee.- 3. Of which the one is of Sulstances, the
rest of Accidents. This Number is taken from
the diversity of Questions which may be made
concerning the first and individual Substances,
as appears trom the very Appellations of the Gnte-
gories.
dx- 4. In these Ten are contain'd all things
which can be pradicated of any Subject; others
directly, others indirectly.
d- 5. That which directly, requires these Five
Conditions.
I. It must be a Pinite Being.
hy this Condition God is exeluded out of the
Categories: For altho' God be a Substance, yet is
he not put in the Category of Substance; for those
things which are directly plac'd in this Category
not only subsist of themselves, bur are subject al-
so to Accidents, as we shall hereafter make ap-
pear, which to think of Giod were impious, Be-
sides, the Genus, properly so call'd, of those things
which are directly plac'd in the same Calegory
must be the same: hut neither Substance, nor
any thing else, can be the Gemus properly so call'd
of things Finite and Infinite: God therefore be-
ing Infnite cannot be directly contain'd under
the Gemus of Finite Substances. Tet is he qui-
vocally revol'd to this Category. For Substance
is the Genus aquivocal both of God and Finite
Substances.
1. Frue and Positive. To a true heing first are
oppos'd Beings of Reason, as Genus, Species, Gre-
which are by no means in Categories, adly, The
fictitious or feign'd, as Ghimara, Gentaure, dre-
which are referr d to Categories Hlypothetically, or
by way of Supposition: For if a Gentaure were
that which it is feign'd to be, it wou'd really be
put in the Category of Substances. adly. Ap-
pearances, or, as they commonly say, Intentio-
nals, as the Rain how, Colours appear ing, Species; and
Spectres
