ommmmmm-
onomniommmmmmmmmmn mmmm-
A
.
TO
ihe Cchlouin of Cartesiuts.
onmmmimmmmmmm-
Tfares with the Woid of Monsiour Deseares,
as with other lately discovered Lands,
whereof such different Accounts are given,
2, as often contradict one another, Scarce
Mention was made of this New World, but an in-
finite Number of French, English and Duichmen
resolve to go see it. The Spaniard, however iea-
lous for new Discoveries, understanding it was
barren of Mines of Gold and Silver, of Indigo
and Ginger, seemed not much concerned about
it: Wherefore those that had most contributed
unto it were not a little pleased, as believing.
they had no Reason to apprehend the Inguisition's
coming there to disturh them. Among other
Things

a opane to the
Things in that World the Earth takes a Turn
about the Sun, as in that of Copernicus: And it
Dese ion, is known that M Deseartes hath more than once
2 len,33, on that occasion, reflected on the Misfortune of
poor Galileus. I cannot tell, but it may be on
his Account he hath taken so much Pains to prove
Fan,3 7, this Parador, That the Earih stands still, though
n, a-
at the same Time it is carried about the Sun by
that Luminary' s Portex. Let it be how it will,
many of those that give out they have best exa-
mined that Country, have made their Relations
of it, but so differently, that a Man can scarce
yet determine what he must believe If von will
credit one Party, they'll tell you, It is no World
at all, but a perfect Chaos: That all lie in Dis-
order, and wiid Consusion That 'tis impossible
for a Man to turn himself in it: That there is
neither Light not, Colours, neither Heat nor
Cold, Drought nor Moisture That Plants and
Animals there don't live. There yon have not
only Liberty, but positive Orders to doubt of
every thing in Nature Some there shall be that
will dispute yon out of the Name of a Msan
though you have a Face like other Men; though
yos he made up of Flesh and Bone as they;
though you Walk, and Fat, and Sleep, and,
in a Word, perform all the Natural Functions
of a Man; yet, Isay, there are those that shall
contest that Title with you, until having con-
versed you, and understood you speak conse-
muentially, they shall be convinced that you have
Reason.
The Inhabltants look Proud and Scornful, and
have not the least Respect for Antiqnity. Ai-
stole, especially is scouled in all Companies, and
upon all Occasions, by them, heing look'd
upon

Cchlouln of Can rEsus.
upon as a Vain habler, and an Animue Teller
of Dreams,. It is said, There is neither good
Christian nor good Catholich there, since they
tamper with Principles too Delicate and Dan-
gerous, in Matters relating to Religion. No
Body can tell what to make of their belief of the
Creation of Our World, the Production of Matter
and the Providence of God; who, with them,
had no other Care upon him than to order the
Cubical Particles of Matter to whirl about their
Center: After which he might sit Idle and
Unconcerned, since all the rest could be managed
without the least of his Assistance.
On the other Side, we are assured, a most
excellent Conduct shines through the whole Com-
position; That all is admirably contrived, and
founded upon the Rules and Laws of Nature;
That this World is indeed disburthened of an
infinite Swarm of Accidents, Qunlities, and Imen-
tional Species, as of an unprofitable Lumber,
wherewith the Philosopher, have imbroiled and
incumbred ours: But yet, notwithstanding it
cannot be deny'd, but the Senses are subject to
the same Impressions there as here, only with
this Difference, that the Causes are more acknow-
ledged, and better explain'd.
As to the Point of Religion, nothing seems
more justisiable than the Apology of these
Gemilemen, which perhaps some have ingaged too
inconsiderately for an Affair of that Weight and
Moment. Can we apprehend a greater Idea of
Gnd Almighty, than that which M Deseartes
hath given? An Idea that he derived not from
the Vvisible Greatures, that sleight and saint say
of an infinitely perfect heing; but which his
Mind found impressed upon it self, and which
les-
B 2

aA clnpane to the
lest no room for him to doubt of the Existence
of a Sovereign Being, though he possessed nei-
ther Heaven nor Earth, nor any Body, nor in-
deed any other Soul than his; Can the Omnipo-
tence of a Deity be advanced to a more tran-
scendent Degree than he hath done it: God,
according to him, tan cause, That Two and
Three shall not make Five; Thatlfour Sides shall
not be requisite'tor make a Square, That the
Whole shalll be no higger than Ohe of its Parts;
Effects that other Philosophdis neven seruple to
place out of the Reach of theacodthead, hut
has not an Anthor of ia little Piecd, a called, A
Letiertwrcie to a Learnedffesuite, clearly shewn,
That 'tis Desearter World that is deseribed in the
first Chapter of Genesis; Another Book hath
since been publish'd in Holland, with the Title
of Cariesius Mosaisans, and is to the same effect.
The huthor of the Treatise concerning The In-
shuence of the Stars, deseribes the End of the
World upon Desearies his Hypothesis, Mon-
sieur Scotanus, in a late Apology, that he offer-
ed for M Deseanes, against those that Endea-
voured torender him obnoxious to the Suspicion
of Atheism, observes to us the Respect he had
for Religion, certifving us, That one of his
Reasons for the reducing his Meditations to the
Number of Sir, was the Consideration of the
Si Bays which God imploved in the Greation
of the World. If we may credit Pather Mer-
sennus, a Learned and Noted Minim, and an
intimate Acquaintance of Deseartes, we shall
find nothing of a more Ohristian Temper, and
that inspires us more ravishingly with the Love
of God than Deseartes Philiosophy. in short;
there is nothing more edifying than the Letter
that

Cclouln of Can ESrus-
that Philosopher wrote to the Sorhon Doctors, in
dedicating his Meditations to them; which is so
true, that not long since, a Friend of mine, not
wont to be very Nice in those Matters, having
read by chance the Letter at my House, which
touched him; and sinding farther the Title of
Mediations in the Front of the Work, he seri-
oufly entreated me to lend him that Godly
Bool, to entertain his Devotions during Passion
Week-
This so strange Variety of Opinions, and
Relations counter to one another, of a World,
otherwise of no little Renown, provoked my
Curiosity, and induced me to be convinced of
the Truth or Falsity of the Reports, in my
own Person. All the Dissiculty was to find a
Guide to conduct me to a Country, to which
there was no Road passable either for Horse or
Foot, for Coach or harge, by Land or Sea-
but presently after my Resolve, I was happily
savoured with the most lucky Occasion that could
he wish'd, for the undertaking my Voyage with
all the Pleasure and Ease imaginable. Having
soiourned some Months in a Country Town,
I strool up Acquaintance with an Old Standard,
of about eighty Years, a Man of Parts, and that
formerly had conversed much with M Deseartes,
That Commerce had begot in him an unaccoint-
able Leal for the Tenets of that Philosopher, and
aasperated him to declaim against the Method
and Opinions of the School, the Preiudices of
Childhood, and taught him to make external Elo-
He had so-
gies on the Cartesian Philosoghy.
given himself up to this Opinion, that he could
no ways suffer, in Point of Philosophy, any one
to deviate never so little from it. In a Con-
ference
B
