The Method to Science: a

LESSON II
How
thefe Common
Heads of Nations are
to be Divided.

1. '"T'HE Differences that divide each Common Head muft be Intrinfecal to, it. Fors fince* we cannot difcourfe of two Döfparate No- * ZI. tions at once ; and fince were thofe Heads divi- S# 5 ded by Differences that are Exrrinfecal to the Common Genus, (or taken from another Head) each Species of it would confift of two Difpara n e
Ä
Notions Science
that ;
hence
the

Differences it
is
abfolutely which

necellary divide
Theke
Common. Heads be fuch as-belong to 70 other
" Common Head, but be wiebsr the Limits of that Head, or Imrinfecal tost. Again; fince the Dsf-
ference j is moft Formal in conftituting the Species,
and
Extrinfecal the
Genus
or

only
Borrow'd.

Material; from

were
another

the
Differences Head,
it
- would follow, that all the Species of the Head divided
ther
Head,

by
viz.

fuch
Differences totkat
Head

would whence

belong
chofe

to
Dif-

ano-

ferences are taken: Which would put all our. . Notions into Confufion, add involve a direft Contradietion, as making Sabfhances to be Qnan-
sitses, Onalities, &c.
2. " Intrinfecal Differences can be no other but
more and le/fs ofthe Common Notion : For fince,
being /rrrinfesal,-} they cannot, be taken from any + S: 1. other
Head,
it follows; chat they muft bartake Fi

sg The Merhod 10 'Sciench,
'the Common Notion of their own. refpeetive Heads. Again, fince, if they did partake ofthe Common otioa Equally,!theg" would. nk. Wiffer in that Notion, and fo would not be Differences of it; it follows, zbar hey n
Muß barseke 0} X. Uncamally; that is, they muft be zoreand.le/s of the Common Notion. nd a NG

3. Hence the Common Notion of Ers, Thing ör Subfkance being that which is capable of Exr . enoe, isImmediately, /ntrinfecally, or Effertially divided into what's ztore and lefs capable of Exi:
»"ftence" Wherefore,; "©
et
" 4. Divipble and Iadivifible, which conftitute Body and Spirit, are the proper. and intrinfecat Differences of the Cominon Head of Subflance ; For, fince Adtual Divifion of the Entity makes. the thing to be no longer indivifam in fe; that is, to be win ; that is, tö be Ers;, tharis, to be' eapable. of Exiftence, it follows, that that, Ers which is Divifible (or: Body) is lefs capable of Exiftenee, that is; has /e/s- of the nature of Ens ör Subfkance ; And the Ens that is Indivifble (or Spirir) has more.
Agatns fine Things Divifible,
6r Bodies, can only have their owz Being or Exiftence; whereas Things sätivifble, or Spirits, are capable of being Otker things alfo, or of having' in them the Naturgs'-and Exiftences of all the things they know ; hence they have a greater Capacity of Exiftence than Bodies: have; fince they have enough for themfelves, and can impart it to Millions of Other things befides ; and, con-$equently; Zsdyand Spirit are conftituted by Divr- 7: Able and /mdivifible, asbythe proper, immediate, and Intrinfecal Differences that divide- Subffance ör ins, | 5. The

. The Metbod to Scieuse. 27
8. The Divifpbihtyand Indsvifibifity. that arethe
In rinfecal n
Differences of Enß, are not thofe of
being Quantitative and not Quantitative, For,
were it fo, it would follow, that fome /ntrinfe-
cal Difterences of Ens in Common would be ta«:
ken from fome osher Flead, vir. that of Quuntity,
and * fo, the Differenees being what's molt For-,,.. mal in the Species, 'hence thofe Species of Ens :"" " would rather be under that Head chan ss ome.
'Again, that Divißbiliey which isof Quantityy may: oftentimes be put into A&, and yet the ame
Ens remain; v.g. aMan may löfethe Quantity
of an Arm; aTree, of.a Branch, &c.: and yet
remain ftil che fame Things ; whereas; if Quanti-
tative Divifibiliey were the Intrinfecal Difference
which conftituted it /uch an Ens, Quantitative. Divifion muft by confequence make it ceafe td
be tbat Ens. ee eg ö
Moreöver, fince Quantity (as will be + fhort: tea ly feen) is Divißbsliry, and Divihbility in Ymty, gg, 24, in cafe Quantity "did Intrinfscallydivide Ens, And conftitute Body, where-ever there were Qnantity
there would.be Unsty under thar notion; and fb
al Quantitative things would be but ore Ers or
'one Body; which is che higheft abfurdity. T'here«-
fore the Divifbility and Indivifibility which are
the intrinfecal Differences of Ers, are not thofe
of being Quantitative and not Quuntitarive,.
- 6. Thereforethe Divifibility and Indivifibiliry
which divide Eng Intrinfecally, muft be the Divifibility and Indivifibility of the Conttituents of
Ens, as fuch; that is, the Diviibility of it into
Maiter and Form, 'and Indivifibility of it into
fweb Conftituent parts: Which u
| Ä Ellen-

23 Tbe Method io Science. Ä
Effentially divide the Genus of Ers, and conftitute the freies of Body and Spirit. For, fince we fee Bodies chang?'d into one another, and therefore, the former Body had really fomewhat in it de- - termining it to be aftually whas- se was, which we call the Form; and fomewhat by which ie . sonld be Another, which we callthe Power to be another, or Matter : Again, fince we fee that the Eorm, which made the former Thing be what it was, is gone when ''tis made Another Thing, and a New Form fucceeds into the fame Matter ; hence we can frame diverfe Conceptions of B>dy, which belong to it as fuch an Es, viz. Matter and 'Form; and havea Ground in Nature to fay there
35 a Real divifibility between them- \Wherefore "£ince that Ens call'd Body, by being divifible into Master and Form,becomes liable tohave the Form, that conftituted it fuch an E»s, feparated from .. .tbe Matter, and fo to lofe its being the fame 'Ens it was, and incapable of exifting any longer ; and, for the fame reafon, a Spirit, by its - st being divifible into Matter and Form, hasnror in its Effence any Principle giving it a Capacity not 0 Exiff, as had the other; but-bss in its Fe, or rather % of its felf a more fimple and 'more perfeft kind of Unsty, and confequently a 'more Noble kind of Entity or Capacity.of exilt-
ing, than is the ocher ; T'hereforehe Divifibilis ty and Irdivißbiliry which divide Ers Intrinfecally, muft be the Divifibility and Indivifibility of it into
Divifisility, Matter
and
becaufe Form;
whichwe it
Metap
yfi- sal
is
che

divifibilicy call

ofihe n
parts of Ensas {uch ; rbat is, of Ers under the Notion of Ess. .
=. For

Tbe Method to Sciense:
- 7. For the fame Reafon given above, ( Sed, 1,2.) Mixt and Simple are the. Intriufecal Differences of Bodp : For,fince Simple Bodies, which we call Elements, have in them but the Nature or Eflence of Ore kind of Body only, and Mixr Bodies have both the nature of That Kind, and of .orker Elements befides; it is manifeft that they divide the Common Notion of Body by more and /e/s, which are Intrinfecal Differences. 8. For the.fame reafon Wirt Body is divided into Ziving Bodies, and not Living by Intrinfecal Lercmces;
becaufe Thofe are more mixt,
T'hefe
£/8, on oo.
9, For the fame Reafon, a Zibing Body, be that which has a Principle of Motion, in it felf, is divided, as by Intrinfecal Differences into 9» nimal, which is more Living, or more moving ie Self ( viz. by every flight Impreflion on the Sen- . fes
ii
Plant, or Vegetable, which is lefs- moving
st Jelf. on
N
10. For.the-fame Reafon, Animal, which is a Body moving it felf by. Impreflion on the Senfes, is intrinfecally divided into JButeg, which do thus move themfelves onely to a fer Determinate number of Adtions, which is to be /efs . moving it [elf by imprefions on the Senfes; and
an, who by his Reafon and Knowledge is apt to move himfelf to a kind of Oxiverfality of Aktion, wbich is to be more moving himfelf by means of fuch impreflions-.

a1. For

36 Fhe Method to' Science. |
. r1. For the fame Reafon, Wan, or Rational Ansmal, is divided intrinfecally and' effentialy into thofe who have zwore and /e/s the Faculty or Power of Resfoning ; who are,. therefore, pro= perly and effentially more and lfs Wen.

j

: Nor, That Common Logicians, becaufe we « 'eandor defcend' or reach to thofe particular - 'intrinfecal Differences which: conftitute /r'dividwals, do therefore make F| 44er] the loweß'fpecies : But ?tis one thing what may
ferve for Logical Speeulation ; another, what the, nature of the thing,bears, and the right' divifion of the Commener Notion'by Mntrin-fecalidifferencesrequires: _Wherefore, tho" not able to-difcern tlie intermediate Sperses, and (as, far as I: have obferv'd') not re-
- fledting thar_ more and' lefs of the common .Notion- do-make the Intrinfeeal and :Effenri'al Differences that cpnftiture its Speciss, Common: Logieians db content themfelves
to put' Individunms'itntniediately unden Mar, and«thence miftake' Man to have no Ejfen- nal" Differences ar: all; but Actidental Ones 'only; yet 'tis manifeif; chat, fince all' /n-dividanms are diverfe Entia or Thingsr and' © Eifente does formally Conftitute an Erss the
- > Di rences that "conffitute 'diverfe Entia mr!t neceflarily be EHlentfal: So thar'a- mo::zft Men there may be many Degrees of: more or lefs Rational, conftituting diverfe under -Speeies of Wan, could we have light to- diitinguifh them ; as well as there are di-
Ä
verfe

Tbe. Method. to Sciencei 3L
verfe pecies of Dogs, Horfes, Trees, and Flowers.

12. Partieular or Singen: Thipgs are properly
call'd Individuumg, becaufethey cannot be divis
ded into mere oftthe ARE, Notien, as allothers
in thg fame Line could. For Socrates cannot; be. divided inte more thar haye.the particular Na-.
ture of Sorrates in_ them, as: Man cHuld into ° more that. have the Comman Nature of Man.
13. Indjviduals only are properly and com
pleatly Entia ar Things, and capable of exifting.,
For, fince the Notion of Thing is [Capable of. Exiftin ] and all'Notions that are faperiour to,
the Individuum are Inadequate or Partial Notions: 1 .
of it, as is. manifelt-, and. the Individuum is. the. Whole, as, comprizing al thofe Parts; and no
Part can exift by its owz Virtue, or ost of the whole; in regard it. would.then be of it.felf a
whole that.
onely.Individhals Ens
and. not. a are.properly Part onely.; and it complear- 'follows,
2

ly

14, Ertia

Individuals or

capable are of

Exifling. the proper Subjedt. or Sup-
pofitum of. all other..Notions or. Natnres.both of.
its own Line, and of allthe reft;, . For, * fince'«se2.13 Individuals onely. are properly Things, or capa-.
ble of: Exifting ; it follows, that both. all in its,
om» Line, and much 'more. in al the orker. Lines (which, have not .at all' in, their pecaliar- Noti-
ons
any,
Order
individuals, or
'Tilo
ta.Exiffence as-in
their )
muff
/appofi-

e«
xift

and

fubfift
tum. or fübject; which leags them to be, and fer
fains them in Being.

Ä
ke

a

32 The Method to Science.
COROLARIES.

n . Hence, ?tis Logicälly demonftrated that every indivsdual Man is but One Ens Or Thing ; 'Gnce he defcends Lineally from that Common Head by intrinfecal Differences of more and de/s, which conftitute him truly Oze in that Line, that is, one Ers, or one Ibize. Whence the contrary Pofition ravels all the Well-Order'd Frame of Human Notions, and the Divifion of ** 2% them by intrinfecal Differences; which (as * has Se. 12, been Ihewn ) muft needs put al our thoughts in:
ro Confufion, and wholly obftruet the Way to
Science. 'Nör matters it that there are wo contrary Natures in him, Corporeal and Spirstual;
fince the Notion of Exs is not che Notion of the wge.ig. Natare, but of the fuppofirum which has tbe nature #» st. Add, that the notion of Ens is in-different to both Natures ; and therefore, ifthey may be co-ordinate to one End, and that it wrong no other Priaciple, they may both club into ore Thing, and compound one Ens: As appears in the /ncarnation, in which the Second erfor of the Trinity afum'd Human Nature, and joyn'd
it to it felf in. the fame fupppfirum..
2. The Notion of Rational (which is in fome fort truly Spörirwal) may be Co-ordinate to the Notion of fome kind of Body. For, fince Animal is direfily fubfum'd wider the Notion of Body, and the Notion of Animal: (or of a Thing moving it felf by Impreflions
a Ä on

Le; The Method to Science.
on the Senfes) is Intrinfecally divided by lef-moving it felf thus, which conftitutes Brures; and zore-moving it felf thüs, which is manifeft-lydone by its being'Rational, that is in part /Pi= _ ritsal;, It follows, thät the Notion of Rational or Spiritsal may be Co-ordinate to.fome Body, (viz, to Animal) as one of the Proper and Intrin«. fecal Differences of that Genus, as is [hewa above. an] | 3. Notwithftanding Man tannot be both. Body and Spirit formally. For, then he muft neceffarily be Two Entities in diftint Lines of. Subftance ; the ong under the Genus of Body, the other of Spirit. _\Whence, he would be Unum and »on-Unum , in the fame regard, or according to the fame Formal Notion; that is, he would be Es and nor Ens; and confilt formal-
ly of two Things as perfectiy diffindt as an Ängel and an Ape; and even be more morffrous than a Aircocervusor Chimara ; becaufe he would
be formally, n hat is effentsally, made up of. two
" more-generically-oppofit Things than theie
are conceiv'd to be. Wherefore, the Notion of Man being deduced by Intrinfecal Differences from the Gerks of Body, he is formally a Body, tho? his Soul be of a fpiriezal Nature, which makes him virtsally a Spirit: Whence alfo, the manner of Exiftence following froin whar's Formal in the Tbing, he has, iz this State, a Cor-
- poreal Manner of Exiftence ; as appears by his. gleaning. Knowledge .by the Senfes; bis being
. Meafurable by Quantity, Alterable by Corpore- "al Qualities; .nay, even his peculiar and pro-
. per Adtion of Difcourfe ikea the flow Pace

Tbe Method to Science. Bock I. 34
of Fancy and Bodily Motion ; none of which could be competent to a Pure Spsrit that exifts after a Spiritma! and Indivifiile manner. Nor "does this more prejudiee the Spiritual Nature of a Soul that ic exifts and works in fome regards after the manner of.a Body, than it does prejudice the Nature of a Body, ( aStone, for exam:» ple) that it exilts in us /persrwally, as it doeg when we kzow it, or have the Zorion or Natare . of it in our Underftanding.
4. Hence is feen whar Notions do formally belong to the Line of Sutflance , or to Ens as Ens, v z. n
the feveral fpreies of it defcending downwards from the Common Head , tilf we come to the J:dividunm ; which therefore is a gompleat Ers, as including all thofe Superiour or _ partial Notions; and * therefore i only is in 'proper fpeech, an Ens or Ihing , in'regard ke - onely being ultimately determin?'d to be Z bis or That, ouly It is, by confequence, capable of exifing, which isthe Definition of Exs. Whenceall "Potential or Indeterminate Notions of Ers, fuch as are Ens, Corpus, Vivens, or Animal in Common, are, for the fame reafon, sucapable of Ex-fing, otherwife than as they are Parts of the . compleat Ers or Individuum ; and therefore they are phras'd by the Schools, Sabffantie Secunde, and the Individuum Sabffantia Prima. Lower than the Individuum in the Line of Ers we cannot go, nor can any Notion be fuperadded to it rhat belong Properly to Ers, bat that of Exsfence, of which Ens is a Capacity. Whence we do not call Exiftence a Form (or Ad,)for This joyn'd with the Matter (or Power) does conflitute that com-
pound

LelE g.: The Method v0 Scheuer.
35
pound Ens call'd Body, and, therefore, are both prefuppos'd to Exifence ; but we call it the laff Formality of every created Ens,. becaufe it has
no Potentiality at all in that Line, but is Pure Adnality, and therefore moft refembles Go»,
our Creator and the füle Giver of Ik, whofe
very. Effence: is Self-Exiftene. FE
$. Allthofe Nations. before faid; takin; them precifely as determining the common Notion of
Ens, and belonging to st ( even to the laft Ads
aliry of it [;Exikence] inchufively) are Merapbys
fra Notions.: The proper Objet of which Sci-
ente is Ers;, not taken as it abftradts from Exs sftenee, but as it:abfirafts from all the other Pre« digaments or common Heads of Notions ; that
is,
or

Maanners from
all
of

Master them.
and :
For Möorion, which
and Reafon all
Modes Exi-

fener, which mwre perfeltly abftraöts from both; does more formally belong vo the Obkt of Me. |
saphyficks.
